## SQL Final Project
## Project Overview
This project focuses on spotify usage per user using compuutational methods. Specifically, I used computational methods to analyze the spotify data to detect patterns, preferences, and how it relates to each age group. 
## Project Motivation
I use spotify on almost a daily basis either for music, audiobooks, or listening to podcasts. Each method is used for different reasons, such as distraction, uplift my mood, or learning new information and much more. I was curious to see how my personal preferences compared to other users and why they use spotify so I decided to use data from spotify to accomplish my goal using my skills in computational methods.
## Dataset
I utilized spotify data using the **Spotify User Behavior Dataset**, which contains recordings from users of **all ages**. This dataset is publicly available from Kaggle by Meera Ajayakumar at the following link:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/meeraajayakumar/spotify-user-behavior-datase
The spotify data is in **.xlsx format** and contains multiple recordings from various users of all ages including their personal preferences. 
## Files and Structure
- **`final_sql_project_script.sql`**: This SQL script handles the import of the dataset using the **.csv** file when converted from the **.xlsx** file for the spotify data and outlines the Spotify User Behavior Analyzation. 
## Key Methods and Approach
- **Database Setup**: Created a database in DBeaver with an information schema and ERD to connect the unique tables together using a primary id, **user_id**, to import the data into each table with their specific data types. Table 1, **Spotify_User**, is information on users and details about each one. Table 2, **Engagement**, is data on preferences on music, genres, podcasts, and time they use spotify most. 
- **Computational Approach**: A **script to query** is employed to extract features from the spotify data and detect patterns associated with preferences. Scripts are well-suited for this type of data due to their ability to manipulate the tables and specific data types per row and column
- **Data Found 1**: Audiobooks is one of my favorite features of Spotify, so I wrote a script to query for those who like **Story Telling** from podcasts which feature **audiobooks** and how it influences their mood and see if their preference is similar to mine. The most common reason they listened to audiobooks was for **'Relaxation and stress relief'**, second most common was for **'Uplifing and motivational'**. I use audiobooks as a way to relieve stress so I am not an anomoaly as a spotify user.
- **Data Found 2**: I was intrested to see if **'Music_Lis_Frequency'** was similar to my parents who are in their 50's and like to listen to music when cleaning or doing projects around their house. I decided to write a script to query the dataset and narrow it down to age **35-60** and compare the results. Those who are age 35-60 listen to music duing **'Study Hours, While Traveling**. These results are similar to my parents, but they do not have school, so they don't use it during 'Study Hours'. 
- **Data Found 3**: I wanted to see how popular the genre **Kpop** was in my age group, **20-35'**, so I queried the data using a script by separtaing **'age'** into groups then displayed the age group as well as the **'Fav_Music_Genre'** Column to find the results. Kpop is not as popular as the genre **'Electronic/Dance'**.
- **Data Found 4**: Most of the time I use spotify in the afternoon when I am finished with my work for the day. I wondered if the time I use spotify was similar to other users, so I decided to analyze the data. I wrote a script that displayed the columns **'Gender'**, and counted how many females there were per **'Music_Time_Slot'**. Most females listen to music at night rather than the afternoon. 
- **Data Found 5**: I wanted to find out the unqiue prefrences of users based on their **'Fav_Music_Genre'** and **'Fav_Pod_Genre'** and compare how different they are when they are not using their phones, **'Smartphone'**. The script was used to display the genres of music and podcasts excluding the use of phones. One of the more unique combinations of genres I found was **Comedy** for podcasts and **Classical** for music. 
## Future Enhancements
- **Data Augmentation**: Implement data augmentation techniques to increase the robustness of the data analyzation.
- **Machine Learning**: Further optimize the analyzation by implementing a machine learning model.
- **Real-time Monitoring**: Develop a real-time monitoring system for continuous user preference based on age.
